Description of video 1:
School Mental Health Program 

Children and adolescence mark significant transitions in physiological, cognitive, emotional, moral, social, and other domains. Though most youngsters sail through these transitions, some become stressed, which may result in psychological problems. School mental health (SMH) programs have proven efficacy in enhancing psychological well-being of school-going children. The World Health Organization (WHO) also advocates School Mental Health Program to be an integral part of school health systems, having components of promotion of psychosocial competence, mental health education, and provision of services for those needing mental health interventions.

Good mental health is critical to children’s success in school and life. Research demonstrates that students who receive social emotional and mental and behavioral health support achieve better academically. School climate, classroom behavior, engagement in learning, and students’ sense of connectedness and well-being all improve as well. Mental health is not simply the absence of mental illness but also encompasses wellness promotion; social, emotional, and behavioral health; and the ability to cope with life’s challenges. Left unmet, mental health problems are linked to costly negative outcomes such as academic and behavior problems, dropping out, and delinquency. Mental and behavioral health problems not only affect students’ short-term classroom engagement, but also interfere with long-term development of positive relationships and work-related skills.

Schools provide an ideal context for prevention, intervention, positive development, and regular communication between school and families. Schools also offer caring relationships and regular, consistent connections between students and staff both in person and virtually. School-employed mental health professionals (i.e., school psychologists, school counselors, school social workers, and school nurses) know the students, parents, and other staff, which contributes to accessibility of services. Research shows that students are more likely to seek counseling when services are available in schools. In some cases, such as rural areas, schools provide the only mental health services in the community. Comprehensive, culturally responsive school mental health services can help address inequities in access and help reduce the stigma associated with receiving mental health services by making it part of the fabric of the school system

 Increased access to mental health services in schools is vital to improving the physical and psychological safety of our students and schools, as well as academic performance and problem-solving skills. Culturally responsive school mental health supports that encompass social–emotional learning, mental wellness, behavioral health, resilience, and positive connections between students and adults are essential to creating a school culture in which students feel safe and empowered to report safety concerns, which is proven to be among the most effective school safety strategies. Additionally, in the aftermath of a crisis, school-employed mental health professionals provide supports that facilitate a return to normalcy, are sustainable, and can help to identify and work with students with more intense or ongoing needs.

Description of video 2:
Stress Management is part of Life Skills and everyone should learn these skills to deal with stress. Stress has become one of the most serious public health issues of this century and we are paying price for our civilization. Repetitive long-term exposure to the stress on our body can cause long-lasting psychological and physical health issues. However, learning to manage stress is essential skills to be learned and it is a part of life skills also. Elimination of stress is impossible because stress is part and parcel of our life, hence it is advisable to learn these skills to manage stress

Description of video 3:
Creative Thinking - An Essential Life Skills

Creative thinking is the ability to create something new for what is presented. This means providing fresh perspectives and new angles to a situation. As a result, we can obtain a solution that was absent earlier, or its need wasn’t even realized.

Creative thinking allows thinking out of the box and picking the most different ideas. This ability means to look at the current scenario and find new alternatives. The uncommon and unconventional ideas can help us in solving a problem. However, it is important to note that creative thinking can be useful beyond creative professions. Musicians, dancers, writers, designers require creativity. But a lot of other people and even professions can benefit from it. 

An idea that can spark change can further bring improvements and revolutions in every field. For example, teachers today give many projects or work to students that need them to brainstorm. 

Creative thinking refers to using abilities and soft skills to come up with new solutions to problems. Creative thinking skills are techniques used to look at the issue from different and creative angles, using the right tools to assess it and develop a plan.

The focus on creativity and innovation is important because most problems might require approaches that have never been created or tried before. It is a highly valued skill to have individually and one that businesses should always aspire to have among their ranks. After all, the word creativity means a phenomenon where something new is created.

Creative thinking is a skill and, like any other, it needs constant exercise to stay sharp. You need to regularly expose yourself to situations in which a new idea is needed and surround yourself with like-minded people to achieve this goal.

Such creative assessment strategies can be very helpful. Students are forced to think beyond the textbooks. As a result, a pool of unique ideas will be generated. This simple change in a method of evaluation can have a list of benefits.

While students will be able to learn according to their needs. Moreover, this can benefit the entire learning process.

Scamper Technique

SCAMPER was first introduced by Bob Eberle to address targeted questions that help solve problems or ignite creativity during brainstorming meetings. The name SCAMPER is acronym for seven techniques; (S) substitute, (C) combine, (A) adapt, (M) modify, (P) put to another use, (E) eliminate and (R) reverse. These keywords represent the necessary questions addressed during the creative thinking meeting.

During the need for critical thinking either alone or inside a group, forcing the mind to think in a specific flow can help emerging innovative ideas that won’t be possible to reach using a regular thinking flow. The SCAMPER technique aims to provide seven different thinking approaches to find innovative ideas and solutions.

The SCAMPER technique is one of the easiest and direct methods for creative thinking and problem-solving through a number of techniques, which can be learnt.

Description of video 4:
Examination Phobia (Exam Phobia) Exam Anxiety 

The term „Phobia‟ is described as an “unreasonable” fear. This fear is groundless and no logical explanation can be given. In that way examination phobia can be defined as having extreme irrational examination fear associated with avoidance of exam. 

Phobia can be diagnosed as uncontrollable anxiety in relation to heights, exams, needles, animals, sounds, visual elements. It’s an extreme, irrational fear. Some would define it as a mental disorder too. In the modern world, among many other phobias, some become victims of a rare kind of phobia called “Exam Phobia”. A person affected with this phobia finds it harder to face various kinds of examinations.

Examination phobia is real and destructive. It is very natural as well as healthy way to approach examination. Examination pressure, to some degree is needed for the students for ensuring them to perform better, but too much pressure for obtaining high marks by the parents and teachers
sometimes becomes barrier for developing mental blockage and low performance. When the exam stress or pressure become „phobia‟ students worry excessively, lack self confidence, develop different psychological reaction like frequent urination, fatigue, dizziness, sleep disturbances, headache, diarrhea and a number of other somatic complaints 

Emotional symptoms such as self-doubt, fear, stress, anger and physical symptoms such as sweating, rapid heartbeat, shortness of breath can be seen in people who are affected by this phobia prior to an examination. These symptoms can affect the overall performance of an affected person. Panic attacks are also commonly seen among the people facing this fear.

Description of video 5:
Life Skills vs Livelihood Skills [What is the difference between Life Skills and Livelihood Skills]

Possessing Life skills enables individuals to deal effectively with the demands and challenges of their daily lives. 

Livelihood skills refers to capabilities, resources, and opportunities for pursuing individual and household economic goals in other words, income generation. Livelihood skills include technical and vocational abilities (carpentry, sewing, computer programing, etc.)

Description of video 6:
Role of School Teachers in Teaching Life Skills

According to the World Health Organization, life skills are:

“A group of psychosocial competencies and interpersonal skills that help people make informed decisions, solve problems, think critically and creatively, communicate effectively, build healthy relationships, empathize with others, and cope with and manage their lives in a healthy and responsible manner”

According to several key organizations including UNICEF, UNESCO, and WHO, the following are the basic life skills:
Self-awareness
Critical thinking
Creative thinking
Decision making
Problem Solving
Effective communication
Interpersonal relationships
Empathy
Coping with stress
Coping with emotion

Of course, these skills overlap, with each of them aiding and supporting the others. There may also be other life skills and there may be subcategories of life skills within each of these basic life skill types. 

Imagine young people graduating from school with excellent scores but not knowing the first thing about coping with reality. What if they couldn't communicate effectively? Or couldn’t handle money issues and were always in debt?

It’s both alarming and all-too-common. That’s why parents and teachers alike should play an active role in preparing kids for the future.

Think of life skills as the building blocks or framework that allow students to apply the knowledge they acquire in school to real world problems and situations. Life skills provide children with important tools for development, such as independent thinking, how to socialize and make new friends, and how to take action in situations where their parents or teachers may not be around to help or intervene (dealing with a bully or personal insecurities and fears, for example.) Unlike motor skills and basic intelligence, executive function and decision-making skills are not innate but learned.

Description of video 7:
Life Skills Education for Children and Adolescents (Life Skills Training)


Life skills can be defined as abilities that enable humans to deal effectively with the demands and challenges of life. They may also be called psychosocial skills, as they are psychological in nature and include thinking and behavioral processes. Others define life skills as behavioral, cognitive, or interpersonal skills that enable individuals to succeed in various areas of life

Research suggests that developing life skills may help reduce drug, alcohol, and tobacco use. It may also reduce aggression and violence. In addition to these bigger outcomes, life skills can just make life a bit easier. When we can regulate our emotions effectively and develop enduring, supportive relationships, we’re happier and healthier. This is why developing life skills is key not only to being successful in life, it’s key for our health and well-being.


According to several key organizations including UNICEF, UNESCO, and WHO, the following are the basic life skills (​​Prajapati, Sharma, & Sharma, 2017):

Self-awareness
Critical thinking
Creative thinking
Decision making
Problem Solving
Effective communication
Interpersonal relationships
Empathy
Coping with stress
Coping with emotion

Of course, these skills overlap, with each of them aiding and supporting the others. There may also be other life skills and there may be subcategories of life skills within each of these basic life skill types. 


(WHO) defines Life skills as the abilities for adaptive and positive behavior that enable individuals to deal effectively with the demands and challenges of everyday life.

Life skill has been classified into three broad categories:

• Thinking skills: Thinking skills are the skill that enhances the logical faculty of the brain using an analytical ability, thinking creatively and critically, and developing problem-solving skills and improving decision-making abilities.

• Social skills: Social skills include interpersonal skills, communication skills, leadership skills, management skills, advocacy skills, co-operation and team building skills, etc.

• Emotional skills: Emotional skills, involves, knowing and being comfortable with oneself. Thus, self–management, including managing/coping with feelings, emotions, stress and resisting peer and family pressure

A relevant and proper implementation of life skill education is a need of an hour, for today’s society. Imparting life skills education to the students, can be helpful as it specifically addresses the needs of children, helps in motivating, providing practical, cognitive, emotional, social and self-management skills for life adjustments. On the whole, life skills education, have found to be an effective psychosocial intervention strategy for promoting positive social, and mental health of adolescents which plays an important role in all aspects such as strengthening coping strategies and developing self-confidence and emotional intelligence, as well as enhancing critical thinking, problem solving and decision making skills as has been well documented in the aforementioned studies. Thus, there
is, significance and importance of life skills education to be integrated into the regular school curriculum and given on a daily basis by a life skills trainer/ teacher/counsellor to enhance the mental health of students, equip them with better adapted skills to face the challenges of changing life situations and empower them to become fully functioning contributors to the host society in particular and the world in general.

Description of video 8:
Critical Thinking - An essential Life Skill  


Critical thinking is the ability to make informed decisions by evaluating several different sources of information objectively. 

Critical thinking is the ability to think in an organized and rational manner in order to understand connections between ideas and/or facts. 


Someone with critical thinking skills is able to think rationally and clearly about what they should or not believe. They are capable of engaging in their own thoughts, and doing some reflection in order to come to a well-informed conclusion. Critical thinkers rigorously question ideas and assumptions rather than accepting them at face value
 

A critical thinker understands the connections between ideas, and is able to construct arguments based on facts, as well as find mistakes in reasoning.It helps you decide what to believe in. In other words, it’s “thinking about thinking”—identifying, analyzing, and then fixing flaws in the way we think


The term critical comes from the Greek word kritikos meaning discerning. So critical thinking is a deeper kind of thinking in which we do not take things for granted but question, analyse and evaluate what we read, hear, say, or write. It is a general term used to identify essential mindsets and skills that contribute to effective decision making. While there are many definitions for critical thinking, here is one that covers its essential aspects:

Critical thinking seeks to identify reliable information and make reliable judgements. It encompasses mindset and skills, both of which can be developed through an understanding of key concepts, practice and application.




what critical thinkers do – the skills they display. You might say that a critical thinker:

-questions everything, including existing social norms and traditions
-thinks systematically, considering all aspects of a problem and looking at each element in its wider context
-carefully examines ideas and information
-looks beyond what may appear as obvious
-uses evidence to support claims
-uses logic and reason in their arguments
-avoids making assumptions
-can recognise (and avoid) logical fallacies
-strives to be aware of their own cognitive biases
-considers different perspectives
-uses the above critical thinking skills to make judgements.


How To Improve Your Critical Thinking

Define Your Question: When it comes to critical thinking, it’s important to always keep your goal in mind. Know what you’re trying to achieve, and then figure out how to best get there.

Gather Reliable Information: Make sure that you’re using sources you can trust — biases aside. That’s how a real critical thinker operates!

Ask The Right Questions: We all know the importance of questions, but be sure that you’re asking the right questions that are going to get you to your answer.

Look Short & Long Term: When coming up with solutions, think about both the short- and long-term consequences. Both of them are significant in the equation.

Explore All Sides: There is never just one simple answer, and nothing is black or white. Explore all options and think outside of the box before you come to any conclusions.


Skills You Need note that someone with critical thinking skills can:

- understand links between ideas
- determine the importance and relevance of arguments and ideas
- recognise, build and appraise arguments
- identify inconsistencies and errors in reasoning
- approach problems consistently and systematically
- reflect on the justification of their own assumptions, beliefs and values.

Creative vs critical thinking 

Creative thinking involves searching for meaningful new connections by generating many unusual, original, and varied possibilities, as well as details that expand or enrich possibilities. 

Critical thinking, on the other hand, involves examining possibilities carefully, fairly, and constructively focusing your thoughts and actions by organizing and analyzing possibilities, refining and developing the most promising possibilities, ranking or prioritizing options, and choosing certain options.

To conclude - Critical thinking is analyzing and developing possibilities to: compare and contrast many ideas; improve and refine ideas; make effective decisions and judgments; and provide a sound foundation for effective action

Description of video 9:
Problem Solving and Decision Making

Problem solving is a valuable skill that can really only be learnt, and perfected, through continual practice. A wide range of problem solving models and techniques are available to assist in evaluating and solving diverse problems of varying degrees of complexity.

Problem-solving skills help you determine the source of a problem and find an effective solution. Although problem-solving is often identified as its own separate skill, there are other related skills that contribute to this ability.

Effective problem solving strategies.

1.Define and understand the problem
2.Assess the scale of the problem
3.Gather relevant information
4.Identify the root causes
5.Test the hypothesis
6.Involve others
7.Consider the proposed solution(s)
8.Test the proposed solution
9.Champion your decision
10.Monitor the results


Problem solving and decision making are not synonymous with each other, but they are both important skills for everyone to have. People often use the terms problem solving and decision making interchangeably specifically because they have elements in common.

Problem solving and decision making involve critical thinking.

Critical thinking is a process by which you question your own assumptions – as well as those of others - in order to decide on next steps to solve a problem. Critical thinking often results in using a mix of research, analysis, questioning and exploration of new ideas in order to gain rich insight into a situation, becoming informed in a way that isn’t restricted by the subjective perspectives of peers or the status quo.

Problem-Solving: A Step by Step Approach
1. Identify the problem?

There is no better starting point than defining what it is that needs to be fixed.

It means taking the time to thoroughly review the situation - separating the symptoms from the cause. Making your diagnosis is about understanding what hurts and why. This takes time and might mean doing a bit of research to reveal the underlying issues behind the problem.

2. Determine the Root Causes

Once you have identified what your problem is, you need to figure out why it is.

What is behind it?
What is causing it?
Can it be quantified or qualified.
What is going on at a core level?
Because as you work towards solving your problem, you are going to want to find a solution that deals with the causes and not just the symptoms, right?  So again, take the time to investigate the situation. Collect information, analyze your findings, and refine your diagnosis.

3. Find Multiple Solutions

Being a good problem-solver means thinking innovatively and that means thinking outside the box. Do not settle for the first solution you find. Push the boat out. Find as many alternative solutions as you can. And then find some more.

This might mean looking for solutions in unusual places or from unusual sources – talking to a different set of colleagues, keeping an open mind, or being receptive to the interchange of ideas or perspectives. Whatever if it takes, once you have a set of alternative solutions, subject them all to analysis.

4. Find the Solution that will Work Best

Easier said than done? Not necessarily. Go about it logically. Answer these questions:

Is it technically viable?
Is it scale-able?
Do you have the resources?
What are the risks? Can they be managed?
Does your solution benefit as many people as possible?
Can it be measured? How will you measure it?
5. Plan and Implement Your Solution

Give this part plenty of thought too. Build a really tight plan to execute your solution.  You will need to cover who, what, when, and how you will implement your plan.

And just as importantly, you will need to think about how you are going to determine if your solution was a success, which leads us to the final step.

6. Measure the Success of Your Solution

How does it measure against your goals? Have you met your objectives? Have you stayed within budget? Is the work complete? Can you see a measurable outcome? 

Evaluating the success of your solution is a vital – and often neglected step – because it shows you clearly whether your solution is the correct one, or whether you need to go back to step one and start over. Because a key part of problem-solving effectively is about being prepared to get it wrong – and to learn from your mistakes.

Description of video 10:
Coping with Emotions (Emotional Self-Regulations) Emotional coping skills [Managing emotions - A like Skill] 

Emotional approach coping is a construct encompassing the intentional use of emotional processing and emotional expression in efforts to manage adverse circumstances. Recognizing a feeling as it happens and being aware of mood and thoughts about that mood. Handling their own feelings and expressing them appropriately. Recognizing how their emotions affect others. Recognizing emotions in others and being sensitive to what they need or want. 

Emotional coping skills help a person to manage the intense feelings and physical stress that accompany painful life transitions

One of the many important life skills is managing feelings, which youth should learn early in their development. Learning experiences for this life skill should teach youth how to express their feelings appropriately and recognize emotions in others. Some of the skills youth can learn when managing feelings include:

- Recognizing a feeling as it happens and being aware of mood and thoughts about that mood.

- Handling their own feelings and expressing them appropriately.

- Recognizing how their emotions affect others.

- Recognizing emotions in others and being sensitive to what they need or want.

- Managing their own emotions and being able to react appropriately to the emotions of others when they are interacting.

Youth should be able to complete the following skills at each age range. Since children and youth develop at different rates, these skills are only a guide and are not a complete list of skills.


Here are some ways that you can help youth learn the skill of managing feelings:

Create a journal to capture feelings, thoughts and moods.

Observe friends or family members and try to identify their emotions when they interact with others and when they are alone.

Create a feelings chart listing the different emotions that people can feel.

Participate in or start a community service project in your town and discuss how it made you feel and how you think it made the people that you helped feel.

Discuss a time when you were happy, sad or angry and how your feelings affected others.

Description of video 11:
Empathy - A Life Skill

Empathy is, at its simplest, awareness of the feelings and emotions of other people. It is a key element of Emotional Intelligence, the link between self and others, because it is how we as individuals understand what others are experiencing as if we were feeling it ourselves.

Empathy may be defined as an accurate understanding of the perspective or the experience of someone else. To be empathic would mean, to some extent, seeing another’s perspective (both intellectual and emotional) and having some understanding of the legitimacy of that perspective. It is important to note that, in most cases, an intellectual understanding is insufficient – to be empathic one must understand the emotional experience of that individual. Understanding other people's emotions is a key skill in the workplace. It can enable us to resolve conflicts, to build more productive teams, and to improve our relationships with co-workers, clients and customers

Empathy goes far beyond sympathy, which might be considered ‘feeling for’ someone. Empathy, instead, is ‘feeling with’ that person, through the use of imagination.

There is an important distinction between empathy, sympathy and compassion.

Both compassion and sympathy are about feeling for someone: seeing their distress and realising that they are suffering. Compassion has taken on an element of action that is lacking in sympathy, but the root of the words is the same.

Empathy, by contrast, is about experiencing those feelings for yourself, as if you were that person, through the power of imagination

Researchers have identified three types of empathy: cognitive empathy, emotional empathy and compassionate empathy.

- Cognitive empathy is understanding someone’s thoughts and emotions, in a very rational, rather than emotional sense.

- Emotional empathy is also known as emotional contagion, and is ‘catching’ someone else’s feelings, so that you literally feel them too.

- Compassionate empathy is understanding someone’s feelings, and taking appropriate action to help

Description of video 12:
Effective Communication Skills - An important Life Skill

Communication skills are the abilities you use when giving and receiving different kinds of information. Communication skills involve listening, speaking, observing and empathizing. It is also helpful to understand the differences in how to communicate through face-to-face interactions, phone conversations and digital communications like email and social media.

When considering the definition of communication skills, it's important to remember that communication occurs in many different ways and contexts. From writing and speaking to body language, we use various skills to convey and obtain information. However, demonstrating strong communication skills is about being able to convey information to others in a simple and unambiguous way.

It involves the distribution of messages clearly and concisely, in a way that connects with the audience.

Good communication is about understanding instructions, acquiring new skills, making requests, asking questions and relaying information with ease.

Good communication skills are perhaps the most basic skills that you can possess as an employee, yet they remain one of the most sought-after by employers.

Good communication involves understanding requests, asking questions and relaying key information.

Developing better communication habits requires several important skills that work in tandem with each other. Some of these skills involve the way you speak or hold your body, and others are more emotionally based interpersonal skills. Here are a few skills that good communicators possess:

- Listening skills: Clear communication starts with active listening. If you’re just focused on how you are expressing yourself, chances are you are not listening or reacting to what others are bringing to the table. An effective communicator uses a variety of listening styles. They pay close attention to what’s being said and make others feel heard and considered.

- Empathy: Being able to understand the feelings of those around you is an integral part of being an effective communicator. Empathizing means both understanding and relating to someone else’s feelings. Having high emotional intelligence and demonstrating an ability to empathize builds rapport between you and others and increases your ability to communicate.

- Nonverbal communication skills: In addition to verbal messages, effective communication relies on nonverbal cues. Developing an awareness of your body language and tone of voice will improve your messaging and presentation skills.

Description of video 13:
Interpersonal Skills - Life Skills  

Interpersonal skills are the behaviors and tactics a person uses to interact with others effectively. In the business world, the term refers to an employee's ability to work well with others. Interpersonal skills range from communication and listening to attitude and deportment.

Interpersonal skills are the skills we use every day when we communicate and interact with other people, both individually and in groups. They include a wide range of skills, but particularly communication skills such as listening and effective speaking. They also include the ability to control and manage your emotions. It is no exaggeration to say that interpersonal skills are the foundation for success in life. People with strong interpersonal skills tend to be able to work well with other people, including in teams or groups, formally and informally. They communicate effectively with others, whether family, friends, colleagues, customers or clients. They also have better relationships at home and at work.

You can improve your interpersonal skills by developing your awareness of how you interact with others and practising your skills.

The skills you need and use to communicate and interact with other people. Those skills are as follows 

1. Verbal Communication – what we say and how we say it;

2. Non-Verbal Communication – what we communicate without words, for example through body language, or tone of voice; and

3. Listening Skills – how we interpret both the verbal and non-verbal messages sent by others.

4. Emotional intelligence – being able to understand and manage your own and others’ emotions.

5. Team-working – being able to work with others in groups and teams, both formal and informal.

6. Negotiation, persuasion and influencing skills – working with others to find a mutually agreeable (Win/Win) outcome. This may be considered a subset of communication, but it is often treated separately.

7. Conflict resolution and mediation – working with others to resolve interpersonal conflict and disagreements in a positive way, which again may be considered a subset of communication.

8. Problem solving and decision-making – working with others to identify, define and solve problems, which includes making decisions about the best course of action

Most people have the potential to exhibit good soft skills, only this aspect of their personality has been eclipsed by negative behaviour that they have learnt over time.

The first step to improving your interpersonal skills is to honestly ask yourself whether you have a blind spot when it comes to people skills, identify target behaviours that are holding back the people-person in you, and then decide to do something about it.

If you’re ready to take the leap, there are many tools to help you, including online courses, personality development courses that teach life skills, and a more exclusive method

Description of video 14:
Self-awareness - Life Skills  (Introspection) Reflection skills

"Self-awareness is the ability to focus on yourself and how your actions, thoughts, or emotions do or don't align with your internal standards

Research suggests that when we see ourselves clearly, we are more confident and more creative. We make sounder decisions, build stronger relationships, and communicate more effectively. We’re less likely to lie, cheat, and steal. We are better workers who get more promotions.

Across the studies, two broad categories of self-awareness kept emerging. The first, 'internal self-awareness', represents how clearly we see our own values, passions, aspirations, fit with our environment, reactions (including thoughts, feelings, behaviors, strengths, and weaknesses), and impact on others. Internal self-awareness is associated with higher job and relationship satisfaction, personal and social control, and happiness; it is negatively related to anxiety, stress, and depression.

The second category, external self-awareness, means understanding how other people view us, in terms of those same factors listed above. Research shows that people who know how others see them are more skilled at showing empathy and taking others’ perspectives. For leaders who see themselves as their employees do, their employees tend to have a better relationship with them, feel more satisfied with them, and see them as more effective in general.

Leaders who focus on building both internal and external self-awareness, who seek honest feedback from loving critics, and who ask what instead of why can learn to see themselves more clearly — and reap the many rewards that increased self-knowledge delivers. And no matter how much progress we make, there’s always more to learn. That’s one of the things that makes the journey to self-awareness so exciting.

Description of video 15:
How to prepare for final exams? Preparing for final theory paper and practical exam and viva voce

Final exams can be exhausting and at times frustrating, if you feel you are not prepared. Many people rely on all-nighters and caffeine to help them get through the week. The benefits of learning
how to prepare for finals are greater than just avoiding cramming the night before the test. This video has many tips on how to get ready for finals

How much is the final exam worth? The greater the weight of the final exam, the more time you should spend preparing for it.

What is the final exam’s format? Is the exam essay questions, multiple choice, completion, etc?

Is the final exam comprehensive? The more comprehensive a final exam is, the more time should be spent on it.

What impact could the final exam grade have on your semester grade in the class? Are you between grades?

Determine what your grade is prior to the exam and how your anticipated final grade will impact your final grade. If a final exam could raise your final grade to the next letter grade, that course should receive more attention. 


Attend all classes, especially during the last week of class. Professors may share information and
announcements that will be helpful for final exam preparation.

-  Double check the time and location for the exam.
- Eat well,  It is important to nourish your body and brain.
- Predict test questions and make yourself a practice test. This helps you identify important concepts.
- Get a full nights sleep before the exam. All-nighters can make it challenging to focus and concentrate on the exam and more difficult to recall information.
- If you are unsure about any of the information, ask your teachers or seniors 
- An effective way to study is with a classmate. Explaining and teaching one another content is very beneficial. If you choose to study with someone, be careful to not get distracted and to stay on task. 
- Be sure to take breaks as you go and do not overload your brain in any one study session.


The night before the exam...
1. Eliminate distractions– turn off social media and electronics. The less interruptions, the better for your studying.

2. Review materials– Briefly review your information. Don’t spend time on information that you know well. Review once and then move on to the more challenging content.

3. Focus on areas that are difficult– The more you understand the challenging information the less you will worry the day of the exam.

4. Sleep– Study earlier, and go to bed at an early hour. It will help you focus during the exam

The morning of the exam...

1. Get there early– Do not arrive after the test has been passed out. It causes a disruption to everyone in the room and you lose time on the test.

2. Take a deep breath– You have made it to the final. Take a deep breath and relax. Don’t let the stress get to you. Focus on doing your best on the exam

Do not avoid taking exam 
Face the exam 
Do not think of ending life for an exam 

The above are just a few success strategies and preparation tips to help you successfully conquer those final exams. Studying, and preparing for, final exams can feel overwhelming; however, remember that you have worked hard all semester, and you are ready to successfully tackle them! Stay positive, stay focused, and stay calm to recall answers

Description of video 16:
Specific Learning Disorder [Developmental Learning Disorder] Learning Disorder [ Part 1 ] SLD

Specific learning disorders are neurodevelopmental disorders that are typically diagnosed in early school-aged children, although may not be recognized until adulthood.

Specific Learning Disability interferes with the normal learning process of the person. The term does not include learning problems that are primarily the result of visual, hearing or motor disabilities, of mental retardation, of emotional disturbance, or of environmental, cultural or economic disadvantage.

 They are characterized by a persistent impairment in at least one of three major areas: 
- reading, 
- written expression, and/or 
- math.

An estimated five to 15% of school-age children struggle with a learning disability. In India the prevalence of Specific Learning Disorder varies from 8-10% of the population.  

An estimated 80% of those with learning disorders have an impairment in reading in particular (commonly referred to as dyslexia).

There is a high comorbidity of specific learning disorder with other neurodevelopmental disorders (such as ADHD) as well as anxiety.

Learning disorders are often noticed for the first time when a child is in preschool or elementary school. Specific signs are different depending on what the child has trouble with. 

Signs and symptoms include:  

Struggling to: 
— Read 
— Write
— Rhyme 
— Oral expression
— Listening comprehension
— Written expression
— Basic reading skill
— Reading fluency skills
— Reading comprehension
— Mathematics calculation or problem solving
— Put sounds in the right order 
— Talking later than other children 
— Trouble remembering words  
— Having trouble sounding out words they don’t know 
— Trouble doing math problems 
— Difficulty understanding the logic behind math problems 
—  Confusing basic symbols such as “+” and “-” 
— Making many small mistakes in math problems, like being off by one  

Some children with a learning disorder can use these skills when a teacher is guiding them, but then they have trouble when they are on their own.

Children having SLD have been found to be suffering from various psychiatric comorbidities. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common comorbid condition with SLD followed by anxiety disorder, mood disorder, and language disorder.  Many children with SLD can experience low self-esteem, lack of confidence, low expectations for themselves, and poor peer relationship because of their poor learning skills.  Studies from India have also reported various clinical problems associated with SLD, such as problem with developmental history, behavioral problems, neurotic traits, lower self-esteem, poor social competence, and high-state anxiety, that make management of SLD difficult.

Outcomes for individuals with learning disorders vary depending on the extent of the difficulty as well as how it is treated. Research shows that, if untreated, a person with a learning disorder can experience a range of negative outcomes including academic failure, the development of disruptive behaviours at school, increased likelihood of school drop-out, unemployment, social difficulties, low self-esteem and depression.

However, with the right type of help and support many people can overcome their difficulties to the extent that they can go on to lead happy and successful lives.

It is important when seeking treatment options, to consider only those interventions that are proven to be effective.

Description of video 17:
Specific Learning Disorder [Developmental Learning Disorder] Learning Disorder [ Part 2 ] SLD

Specific learning disorders are neurodevelopmental disorders that are typically diagnosed in early school-aged children, although may not be recognized until adulthood.

Specific Learning Disability interferes with the normal learning process of the person. The term does not include learning problems that are primarily the result of visual, hearing or motor disabilities, of mental retardation, of emotional disturbance, or of environmental, cultural or economic disadvantage.

 They are characterized by a persistent impairment in at least one of three major areas: 
- reading, 
- written expression, and/or 
- math.

An estimated five to 15% of school-age children struggle with a learning disability. In India the prevalence of Specific Learning Disorder varies from 8-10% of the population.  

An estimated 80% of those with learning disorders have an impairment in reading in particular (commonly referred to as dyslexia).

There is a high comorbidity of specific learning disorder with other neurodevelopmental disorders (such as ADHD) as well as anxiety.

Learning disorders are often noticed for the first time when a child is in preschool or elementary school. Specific signs are different depending on what the child has trouble with. 

Signs and symptoms include:  

Struggling to: 
— Read 
— Write
— Rhyme 
— Oral expression
— Listening comprehension
— Written expression
— Basic reading skill
— Reading fluency skills
— Reading comprehension
— Mathematics calculation or problem solving
— Put sounds in the right order 
— Talking later than other children 
— Trouble remembering words  
— Having trouble sounding out words they don’t know 
— Trouble doing math problems 
— Difficulty understanding the logic behind math problems 
—  Confusing basic symbols such as “+” and “-” 
— Making many small mistakes in math problems, like being off by one  

Some children with a learning disorder can use these skills when a teacher is guiding them, but then they have trouble when they are on their own.

Children having SLD have been found to be suffering from various psychiatric comorbidities. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common comorbid condition with SLD followed by anxiety disorder, mood disorder, and language disorder.  Many children with SLD can experience low self-esteem, lack of confidence, low expectations for themselves, and poor peer relationship because of their poor learning skills.  Studies from India have also reported various clinical problems associated with SLD, such as problem with developmental history, behavioral problems, neurotic traits, lower self-esteem, poor social competence, and high-state anxiety, that make management of SLD difficult.

Outcomes for individuals with learning disorders vary depending on the extent of the difficulty as well as how it is treated. Research shows that, if untreated, a person with a learning disorder can experience a range of negative outcomes including academic failure, the development of disruptive behaviours at school, increased likelihood of school drop-out, unemployment, social difficulties, low self-esteem and depression.

However, with the right type of help and support many people can overcome their difficulties to the extent that they can go on to lead happy and successful lives.

It is important when seeking treatment options, to consider only those interventions that are proven to be effective.

Description of video 18:
Specific Learning Disability Certification [SLD disability certification] RPWD Act, 2016

Specific learning disability (SLD) is characterized by one or more significant impairments in acquisition of reading, spelling, or arithmetical skills, which are not the direct result of other disorders (such as mental retardation, gross neurological deficits, uncorrected visual or auditory problems, or emotional disturbances) or inadequate schooling.

SLD assessments 

The child has to be brought at (minimum) least three times to the Child Guidance clinic Clinic for various assessments as per appointments given.

These cannot be combined into a single session as this gets very taxing for the child and error/false reporting can occur. 

The dates of appointments for these testing are given by the Secretary in the child guidance Clinic and the entire procedure to be followed will be clearly explained by her to each parent.

Appointment for assessment may be available after many months (there is a waiting period from 7 to 10 months) to get SLD assessment first appointment. It depends upon the waiting list numbers. Total duration to get the SLD disability certification is somewhere in the range of 9 to 15 months.

The first appointment is given for child’s detailed clinical and neurological examination. (which takes about 30 minutes to be completed).

The second appointment is for testing the child’s intellectual capacity (IQ testing). (which takes about 60-90 minutes to be completed).

The third appointment is for the educational testing of the child. (which takes about 60-90 minutes to be completed).

In general the accompanying parent would have to take a half-day off from work / other family responsibilities for each of the three appointments

Generally it takes about three weeks from the date of appointment of SLD assessment; beginning from the time of the first assessment done in the Child Guidance clinic (namely, the child’s detailed clinical and neurological examination).

 The certificate will be issued to the parent(s) after a meeting with the Counselor in the Child Guidance Clinic who will explain the child’s diagnosis and how to help the child achieve his/her maximum potential.

None of these examinations are painful or inconvenient to the child. The child need not be starving for any of these ‘tests’.

Vision testing to be done by an Ophthalmologist (Eye Specialist). Hearing testing (Audiometry) to be done from an ENT Specialist and Eye test from Ophthalmologist may be required. Both the vision and hearing testing reports should be recent (done in the past 3 months) to be considered valid

In recent years, awareness about SLD has increased manifolds due to media. Now there are standardized tests to assess the disability and it`s severity. The demand for SLD certificate has increased out of proportion; parents and teachers both want to avail advantages of the SLD certificates, irrespective of the child`s level of disability. The use of the certificate for deserving students is righteous. But in our country abuse of a facility is growing like a menace.

Registering on swavlambancard.gov.in to get unique disability card 

Steps to follow:

Fill the form provided on the website (swavlambancard.gov.in) Unique Disability ID, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Government of India

Upload all details with relevant pics/images reqd. Ensure that each image is less than 2MB.
On submission of info, you get a receipt indicating name of authorised hospital.

Visit the hospital with all original documents. On review of these documents, a medical /clinical test is done by the authorised medical practitioners in the hospital…. and they confim verification on the above website.

Within 30 days, the e-copy of the UDID card is visible on the website …against your specific login.

Take print of this e-copy…. IT is offical document and can be used for all relevant disability benefits /concessions.

After 60–90 days, the plastic Disability card can be collected from the same hospital authorities.

Description of video 19:
Dyscalculia [Maths difficulty] Arthimetic disability 

Dyscalculia is a term referring to a wide range of difficulties with maths, including weaknesses in understanding the meaning of numbers, and difficulty applying mathematical principles to solve problems

Studies have been done to try to identify predictors of potential mathematical disability. The main predictors include: 
- Not knowing which of two digits is larger, i.e. understanding the magnitude and relationship of numbers
- Lacking effective counting strategies
- Poor fluency in identification of numbers
- Inability to add simple single-digit numbers mentally
- Limitations in working memory capacity

If basic maths facts are not mastered, many teenagers and adults with dyscalculia may have difficulty moving on to more advanced maths applications. Additional language processing disorders can make it difficult for a person to grasp the vocabulary of maths. Without a clear understanding of this vocabulary, it is difficult to build on maths knowledge.

An evaluation reveals how a person understands and uses numbers and maths concepts to solve advanced-level, as well as everyday, problems. The evaluation compares a person’s expected level of performance (based on their educational history and the level of remediation they have received) and their current level of skill and understanding, while noting specific strengths and weaknesses.

Recognising a student’s strengths and weaknesses is the first step to getting help. Following identification, parents, teachers and other educators can work together to establish strategies that will help the student learn maths more effectively. 

Help outside of the classroom can assist a student to achieve mastery in areas of weakness before moving on to new topics. Repeated reinforcement and specific practice can make understanding easier.

Additional strategies to support individuals with dyscalculia can include:
- Explicit instruction in effective counting and calculation techniques
- Allow the use of calculators when mental maths is not the objective of the lesson
- Utilise number fact charts and times table charts to assist with recall
- Use graph paper to assist with lining up written work appropriately
- Focus on a few maths facts at a time and ensure mastery before introducing new facts
- Allow additional time to complete maths activities or reduce the number of questions students need to complete in class
- Play games that reinforce the maths concept

Description of video 20:
Dyslexia [ Learning Disorder] Difficulty in Reading 

Dyslexia involves the ways that the brain processes graphic symbols and the sounds of words. It commonly affects word recognition, spelling, and the ability to match letters to sounds. Dyslexia is a learning disorder that involves difficulty reading due to problems identifying speech sounds and learning how they relate to letters and words (decoding). Also called a reading disability, dyslexia is a result of individual differences in areas of the brain that process language.

Dyslexia is not due to problems with intelligence, hearing or vision. Most children with dyslexia can succeed in school with tutoring or a specialized education program. Emotional support also plays an important role. Dyslexia is characterized by deficits in accurate and fluent word recognition.

Reading is complex. It requires our brains to connect letters to sounds, put those sounds in the right order, and pull the words together into sentences and paragraphs we can read and comprehend.

People with dyslexia have trouble matching the letters they see on the page with the sounds those letters and combinations of letters make. And when they have trouble with that step, all the other steps are harder.

Dyslexic children and adults struggle to read fluently, spell words correctly and learn a second language, among other challenges. But these difficulties have no connection to their overall intelligence. Individuals with dyslexia struggle with word recognition, decoding, and spelling. Reading comprehension is sometimes impaired due to very poor word reading skills.

Individuals with dyslexia often have deficits in phonemic and phonological awareness, which refer to the ability to hear, identify and manipulate the sound structure of a spoken word, including its phonemes, syllables, onsets and rhymes.

Individuals with dyslexia may also have impaired orthographic processing, which interferes with connecting letters and letter combinations with sounds accurately and fluently. Scientific research shows differences in brain connectivity between dyslexic and typical reading children, providing a neurological basis for why reading fluently is a struggle for those with dyslexia.

Dyslexia can’t be “cured” – it is lifelong. But with the right supports, dyslexic individuals can become highly successful students and adults.


Symptoms of Dyslexia

- Trouble learning common nursery rhymes

- Difficulty learning (and remembering) the names of letters in the alphabet

- Seems unable to recognize letters in his/her own name

- Mispronounces familiar words

- Doesn’t recognize rhyming patterns like cat, bat, rat

- A family history of reading and/or spelling difficulties (dyslexia often runs in families)

- Reading errors that show no connection to the sounds of the letters on the page

- Does not understand that words come apart

- Complains about how hard reading is; “disappears” when it is time to read

- A history of reading problems in parents or siblings

- Cannot sound out even simple words like cat, map, nap

- Does not associate letters with sounds, such as the letter b with the “b” sound

- Very slow in acquiring reading skills. Reading is slow and awkward

- Trouble reading unfamiliar words, often making wild guesses because he cannot sound out the word

- Doesn’t seem to have a strategy for reading new words

- Avoids reading out loud

Treatment

There's no known way to correct the underlying brain differences that cause dyslexia. However, early detection and evaluation to determine specific needs and appropriate treatment can improve success. In many cases, treatment can help children become competent readers.

Dyslexia is treated using specific educational approaches and techniques, and the sooner the intervention begins, the better. Evaluations of your child's reading skills, other academic skills and mental health will help your child's teachers develop an individual teaching program.

Teachers may use techniques involving hearing, vision and touch to improve reading skills. Helping a child use several senses to learn — for example, listening to a taped lesson and tracing with a finger the shape of the letters used and the words spoken — can help in processing the information

Description of video 21:
Dysgraphia [ Learning Disability ] Writing Problem 

Dysgraphia is a learning disability of written expression, that affects the ability to write, primarily handwriting, but also coherence. Dysgraphia is a brain-based learning disability that affects writing. 

Dysgraphia is a neurological disorder of written expression that impairs writing ability and fine motor skills. It is a learning disability that affects children and adults, and interferes with practically all aspects of the writing process, including spelling, legibility, word spacing and sizing, and expression.

It’s estimated that 5 to 10 percent of all children have some type of writing deficit like dysgraphia

- Trouble forming letters shapes

- Tight, awkward, or painful grip on a pencil

- Difficulty following a line or staying within margins

- Trouble with sentence structure or following rules of grammar when writing, but not when speaking

- Difficulty organizing or articulating thoughts on paper

- Pronounced difference between spoken and written understanding of a topic

Initially, children with impaired handwriting benefit from activities that support learning to form letters:

- playing with clay to strengthen hand muscles;

- keeping lines within mazes to develop motor control;
- connecting dots or dashes to create complete letter forms;
- tracing letters with index finger or eraser end of pencil;
- imitating the teacher modeling sequential strokes in letter formation; and
- copying letters from models.

Subsequently, once children learn to form legible letters, they benefit from instruction that helps them develop automatic letter writing, using the following steps to practice each of the 26 letters of the alphabet in a different order daily:

- studying numbered arrow cues that provide a consistent plan for letter formation
- covering the letter with a 3 x 5 card and imaging the letter in the mind’s eye
- writing the letter from memory after interval that increases in duration over the handwriting lessons
- writing letters from dictation (spoken name to letter form).

Description of video 22:
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Part 1 [Diagnosis, Prevalence, and Neurobiology] 

ADHD is one of the most common neurodevelopmental disorders of childhood. It is usually first diagnosed in childhood and often lasts into adulthood. Children with ADHD may have trouble paying attention, controlling impulsive behaviors (may act without thinking about what the result will be), or be overly active.

Signs and Symptoms - It is normal for children to have trouble focusing and behaving at one time or another. However, children with ADHD do not just grow out of these behaviors. The symptoms continue, can be severe, and can cause difficulty at school, at home, or with friends.

A child with ADHD might:

daydream a lot
forget or lose things a lot
squirm or fidget
talk too much
make careless mistakes or take unnecessary risks
have a hard time resisting temptation
have trouble taking turns
have difficulty getting along with others

Types
There are three different ways ADHD presents itself, depending on which types of symptoms are strongest in the individual:

1. Predominantly Inattentive Presentation: It is hard for the individual to organize or finish a task, to pay attention to details, or to follow instructions or conversations. The person is easily distracted or forgets details of daily routines.

2. Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive Presentation: The person fidgets and talks a lot. It is hard to sit still for long (e.g., for a meal or while doing homework). Smaller children may run, jump or climb constantly. The individual feels restless and has trouble with impulsivity. Someone who is impulsive may interrupt others a lot, grab things from people, or speak at inappropriate times. It is hard for the person to wait their turn or listen to directions. A person with impulsiveness may have more accidents and injuries than others.

3. Combined Presentation: Symptoms of the above two types are equally present in the person.
Because symptoms can change over time, the presentation may change over time as well.

Causes of ADHD

Scientists are studying cause(s) and risk factors in an effort to find better ways to manage and reduce the chances of a person having ADHD. The cause(s) and risk factors for ADHD are unknown, but current research shows that genetics plays an important role. Recent studies link genetic factors with ADHD.1

In addition to genetics, scientists are studying other possible causes and risk factors including:

Brain injury
Exposure to environmental risks (e.g., lead) during pregnancy or at a young age
Alcohol and tobacco use during pregnancy
Premature delivery
Low birth weight

Research does not support the popularly held views that ADHD is caused by eating too much sugar, watching too much television, parenting, or social and environmental factors such as poverty or family chaos. Of course, many things, including these, might make symptoms worse, especially in certain people. But the evidence is not strong enough to conclude that they are the main causes of ADHD.

Diagnosis of ADHD as per DSM V 

Typically, ADHD symptoms arise in early childhood. According to the DSM-5, several symptoms are required to be present before the age of 12. Many parents report excessive motor activity during the toddler years, but ADHD symptoms can be hard to distinguish from the impulsivity, inattentiveness and active behavior that is typical for kids under the age of four. In making the diagnosis, children should have six or more symptoms of the disorder present; adolescents 17 and older and adults should have at least five of the symptoms present. The DSM-5 lists three presentations of ADHD—Predominantly Inattentive, Hyperactive-Impulsive and Combined. 

1. ADHD predominantly inattentive presentation

Fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes
Has difficulty sustaining attention
Does not appear to listen
Struggles to follow through with instructions
Has difficulty with organization
Avoids or dislikes tasks requiring sustained mental effort
Loses things
Is easily distracted
Is forgetful in daily activities



2. ADHD predominantly hyperactive-impulsive presentation

Fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in chair
Has difficulty remaining seated
Runs about or climbs excessively in children; extreme restlessness in adults
Difficulty engaging in activities quietly
Acts as if driven by a motor; adults will often feel inside as if they are driven by a motor
Talks excessively
Blurts out answers before questions have been completed
Difficulty waiting or taking turns
Interrupts or intrudes upon others

ADHD combined presentation

The individual meets the criteria for both inattention and hyperactive-impulsive ADHD presentations.

Description of video 23:
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Adult [ Adult ADHD] ADHD in Adults

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) historically was considered to be a disease of childhood, affecting 5 to 6 percent of school age children.

It is now well established that ADHD symptoms persist into adult life in 50 to 60 percent of cases. 

The prevalence of Adult ADHD is 2 to 2.5 percent of adults

ADHD is not an acquired disorder of adult life. To qualify for ADHD as an adult, one must have had it as a child, although some of the symptoms of ADHD can occur in adults due to brain injuries or other organic causes. Symptoms are present consistently since childhood, and do not occur episodically.

Adults commonly complain of impairment in work and at home and in relationships with other people due to impulsiveness, hyperactivity, and difficulty paying attention. They often have an associated psychiatric disorder, such as depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, substance abuse, or a learning disability

Untreated or under-treated adult ADHD may result in impaired occupational functioning and interpersonal and legal difficulties. ADHD in adults is associated with higher separation and divorce rates and more frequent job changes

Signs and Symptoms of Adult ADHD

Difficulty getting started on tasks
Variable attention to details
Difficulties with self-organization and with prioritization
Poor persistence in tasks that require sustained mental effort
Impulsivity and low frustration tolerance (to varying degrees)
Hyperactivity (less salient symptom in adults)
Chaotic life-styles
Associated psychiatric comorbidities (in some patients)
Disorganization
Substance abuse (in some patients)

There are no laboratory studies currently available to diagnose adult ADHD. However, the psychiatrist should monitor liver function studies and a CBC (complete blood count) both prior to initiation of treatment with medication and serially thereafter. Hyperthyroidism should be ruled out.

Treatment Methods of Adult ADHD
Stimulants alone
Stimulants with other psychotropic medication
Nonstimulant psychotherapeutic medications alone
Supportive psychotherapy
Behavioral interventions/psychotherapy

The purpose of medications used in the treatment of adult ADHD is to obtain enhanced attention, better academic performance, and facilitated working memory. Medications also can reduce psychomotor activity, decrease aggression, and decrease disruptive behavior.

ADHD is now understood to be a disorder that persists into adulthood in some persons and has global effects on their daily lives, affecting social, occupational, and relational functioning. Evidence-based pharmacologic, psychosocial, and psychotherapeutic interventions are available for effective treatment

Description of video 24:
Course and outcome of Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder [Impact of ADHD] Economic Burden of ADHD

Earlier. ADHD was concerned as a typical childhood disorder. Long-term studies though, showed that an 5-76% percentage of children with ADHD grew as adults with ADHD. 


Although commonly diagnosed in childhood, ADHD can persist into adolescence and adulthood and adversely affect functional outcomes. Academic difficulties are a common problem in ADHD and are often the reason for a child’s initial referral for clinical evaluation

An 8-year longitudinal study showed that ADHD diagnosis at 4 to 6 years of age predicted lower reading, spelling, and math standardized achievement test scores in adolescence after controlling for IQ (Massetti et al., 2008). Children diagnosed with Inattentive Type ADHD in childhood had lower achievement scores in adolescence compared with either children diagnosed with Combined Type ADHD or control comparison children (Massetti et al., 2008). On average, children with ADHD earn lower grades compared with peers (Frazier et al., 2007). 

Most children with this condition continue with its symptoms into adulthood. 80% of the children who require medication for ADHD will need them as teenagers. Over 50% need medication as adults.

If left untreated, ADHD can gravely interfere with the social and educational performance of an individual and may impair the individual's self-esteem. They may be looked down on as trouble makers or slow learners at school and invariably be treated as out casts. Most of them have failed relationships with colleagues or peers. They may have strained relationship with parents and siblings too.

25-30% of ADHD children with conduct disorder problem develop antisocial personality disorder and become victims of substance abuse, criminal behavior. Being prone to depression and anxiety, they have suicidal tendencies too.

 Social and emotional adjustment problems may be persistent. Poor acceptance by peers and loneliness tend to increase with age and with the obvious display of symptoms. Substance abuse may result if ADHD is not identified and adequately treated because many adolescents and adults with ADHD self-medicate with both legal (eg, caffeine) and illegal (eg, cocaine, amphetamines) substances.

Although hyperactivity symptoms and signs tend to diminish with age, adolescents and adults may display residual difficulties. Predictors of adult ADHD include
- Severe ADHD 
- comorbid ODD / conduct disorder
- Comorbid depression
- Poor compliance to treatment 

To conclude - Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), one of the most common neuropsychiatric disorders of childhood and adolescence, often persists into adulthood. Studies have found that a majority of people diagnosed with ADHD in childhood continue to meet criteria for the disorder as adults. More recent studies have found that a substantial proportion of those with adult ADHD did not have the condition in childhood. ADHD in adulthood is associated with significant impairment in occupational, academic, and social functioning

Description of video 25:
Role of Parents in teaching Life Skills [Life Skills Education at Home]

According to the World Health Organization, life skills are:

“A group of psychosocial competencies and interpersonal skills that help people make informed decisions, solve problems, think critically and creatively, communicate effectively, build healthy relationships, empathize with others, and cope with and manage their lives in a healthy and responsible manner”

In this constantly changing post-covid world - developing life skills is an essential part of being able to meet the challenges of everyday life and even more. Parents have a pivotal role in the overall development of the child. So awareness about life skills and advantages of having good life skills, are essential for bringing up a child as a successful and happy individual. The present video deals with the Role of Parents for the Life Skill Development in Children.

According to several key organizations including UNICEF, UNESCO, and WHO, the following are the basic life skills:
- Self-awareness
- Critical thinking
- Creative thinking
- Decision making
- Problem Solving
- Effective communication
- Interpersonal relationships
- Empathy
- Coping with stress
- Coping with emotion

Of course, these skills overlap, with each of them aiding and supporting the others. There may also be other life skills and there may be subcategories of life skills within each of these basic life skill types. 

Imagine young people graduating from school with excellent scores but not knowing the first thing about coping with reality. What if they couldn't communicate effectively? Or couldn’t handle money issues and were always in debt?

It’s both alarming and all-too-common. That’s why parents and teachers alike should play an active role in preparing kids for the future.

Think of life skills as the building blocks or framework that allow students to apply the knowledge they acquire in school to real world problems and situations. Life skills provide children with important tools for development, such as independent thinking, how to socialize and make new friends, and how to take action in situations where their parents or teachers may not be around to help or intervene (dealing with a bully or personal insecurities and fears, for example.) Unlike motor skills and basic intelligence, executive function and decision-making skills are not innate but learned.

Teaching our children life skills is essential so that they can have a rough idea of what they want to accomplish with their lives and, more crucially, recall the type of person they want to be. Focus your efforts on educating children in a fun and engaging way so that they may be confident in their values and talents!

